---
layout: post
title: "STEP"
author: "tripattern"
categories: journal
tags: [agile,lean,cip,ci,empirical]
image: step.jpg
---

A small empirical cycle for your day to day.

### Introduction
One of the challenges many people face is being able to focus. Our days are often filled with distractions of our own doing (Social Media...) and distractions that come from others (meetings upon meetings upon meetings...). How do we find ways to focus on specific tasks and ensure we give those tasks the undivided attention they require?

Many people have offered solutions to this problem. Some solutions include:
* [Pomodoro Technique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique)
* [TDD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development)
* [Deep Work](https://www.calnewport.com/books/deep-work/)
* [Getting Things Done](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Getting_Things_Done)
* [The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_7_Habits_of_Highly_Effective_People)
* [Eisenhower Method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_management#The_Eisenhower_Method)

I wanted to find a solution that learns from the patterns of others, but also takes into account the challenges of working within or on complex systems. I came to realize that what I actually needed was an agile process reduced to a time box of one hour. What followed was the development of the STEP process I have outlined in this article.

### How it Works
There are four main steps to the STEP workflow:
* Plan
* Execute (Do)
* Review & Reflect
* Rest & Reorientate
* Repeat...

#### Plan
1' - 5' minutes before the hour starts we take time to plan our work for the next hour. Here we can use a TDD test list to help us plan the hour, alternatively, we can set SMART goals. If we are pairing with someone we can decide on our goals together for the next hour's pairing session.

#### Execute (Do)
For 45 minutes you should execute the plan. Start by setting a visual timer for yourself so that you have a feel for how quickly the time is passing. I would also recommend working in smaller cycles here. When coding I would recommend using smaller TDD cycles. Alternatively, for other tasks try working on an element on your list for 5’ - 10’ and if you are not making any progress take a step back and discuss the problem with your colleagues or set it aside and work on the next goal on your list. An extremely important point is to finish an increment of work in this time period.

Examples would be:
* aiming to commit code that makes a new test green by the end of the hour,
* finishing a paragraph or two in your document,
* completing 2-3 slides for a presentation.

It is important that you can show someone at the end of the hour the progress you have made and they would be able to understand what you have accomplished and provide meaningful feedback.

A special note for pair work is that you should often swap the keyboard or pen when you are working together during the course of the 45’ to stay engaged. Avoid a situation where the one party is not fully involved in the pairing work. For coders there are some helpful techniques for ensuring this, such as regularly switching the keyboard or where one person writes a failing test and the other has to make it green etc.

#### Review & Reflect
At the end of your session show someone what you have accomplished and get some feedback! Take a few minutes to reflect on what you accomplished as well as your approach! Could you have tackled your challenge another way that may be more effective? Try and find ways to improve on your approach to your work. If you have any ideas try and build them into the plan for the next STEP.

If you are working in pairs take a few minutes to show others what you accomplished and then do a mini retro where you talk about what went well during the session, what could be improved and discuss concrete ideas to improve the next pairing session.

#### Rest & Reorientate
In between sessions you can take time to check emails, social media, or have a toilet break. What I would also recommend is to get up from your desk and get some fresh air, do some exercise (Pilates, Back Exercises, Forest Bathing etc.).

I would also recommend using this time to reorientate. Often we get so caught up in the details of our day that we lose our direction and begin to waste time on tasks that are not that important when compared to our overall goals and objectives. Taking a break and getting out of the office briefly can help us to re-align ourselves with our main purpose.

#### Repeat…
After a short break of about 10’ begin the next planning session for the next hour as before. You should be able to do 3-4 cycles before taking a longer break such as a lunch break of about 30 minutes to an hour before continuing.
Conclusion
In closing, we have seen how one can apply an agile process to small iterations of work that are about an hour in length. I would love to hear your feedback on your practical experience with the STEP process! Let me know how it goes!

### Conclusion
In closing, we have seen how one can apply an agile process to small iterations of work that are about an hour in length. I would love to hear your feedback on your practical experience with the STEP process! Let me know how it goes!
